.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

=============
CFS Overview
=============

History
-------

Linux 2.6.23 introduced a modular scheduler core and a Completely Fair Scheduler
(CFS) implemented as a scheduling module. Scheduler has been improving since
kernel version 2.4. In kernel 2.4  there was one running queue for all processes.
During every schedule the queue was locked and every task time-slice was update.
This implementation caused interactivity issues. A re-write in kernel version 2.5
assigned a running queue for each processor a running queue and was able to
achieve a O(1) run time irrespective of the number of tasks in the system. This
scheduler did good until the Rotating Staircase Deadline (RSDL) scheduler was
introduced. The RDSL scheduler attempted to reduce the scheduler complexity. The
CFS scheduler was inspired from the RDSL scheduler and the current CFS scheduler
originated. The improvements were not only in performance and interactivity but
also simplicity of the scheduling logic and modularized scheduler code. Since
kernel 2.6.23, there has been improvements to the CFS scheduler in the areas of
optimization, load balancing and group scheduling features.

RDSL scheduler removed the interactivity estimation code from the previous linux
scheduler. RDSL was fair by giving equal time slices to all processes. There was
no classification of IO bound or CPU bound processes. CFS adopts this concept of
fairness. CFS takes in to use the length of the sleep time in the interactive
process so processes which sleep less will get more CPU time.

CFS uses a time ordered red-black tree for each CPU. The red-black tree is a type
of self-balancing binary search tree. Every running process, has a node in the
red-black tree. The process at the left-most position of the red-black tree is
the one to be scheduled next. The red-black tree is complex, but it has a good
worst-case running time for its operations and is efficient in practice: it can
search, insert, and delete in O(log n) time, where n is the number of elements in
the tree. The leaf nodes are not relevant and do not contain data. The red-black
tree is always balanced. Because the red-black tree is a binary tree, the time
complexities of lookup operations are logarithmic. However, non-left-most lookup
is hardly ever done and the left-most node pointer is always cached.A red-black
tree can be implemented with internal storageâ€”that is, no external allocations
are needed to maintain the data structure.

The implementation of the rb tree is at ::

    include/linux/rbtree.h
